- We first looked at how
we can motivate people
who are just looking
and try and knock them
into those impulse purchases.
We then looked at how we could
remove some of the impact
of high shipping costs
by offering memberships
or trigger points where people could
increase their basket value
in order to get free shipping.
Then we took an intensely critical look
at the frankly unacceptable practise
of requiring people to
sign up for an account
before they go to checkout.
We then looked at how to-
(audio rewinding)
(dramatic music)
You see them come on to your
website and your heart rate
starts to raise a little bit.
You see them find their way
to a product category page.
They're close. They find
a product that they like.
They click on the product page
and you can seem them browsing,
looking at the information.
Result, they've clicked add to cart.
Here we go.
You feel your pulse start
to raise a little bit more
no matter how many sales you get,
the thrill of watching a
live purchase never dies.
They go through to the checkout. (gasps)
But then nothing.
They leave.
They close their browser window
never to return.
Hurt, you start scheming.
Can you find them?
What was their IP address again?
Where are they based?
Wait, could I visit them?
They're only a couple hundred miles away.
Maybe they'll be back.
But what if they're not?
Let's look them up on Facebook.
(quirky music)
Basket, cart, or checkout
abandonment is painful
and it doesn't get any easier
as the numbers start to scale.
If you've ever watched visitors
using your eCommerce store
live in your analytics,
oh, it can be a torturous thing.
Checkout, basket, or cart abandonment
never gets any easier
as the numbers scale,
you just get more frustrated at these
horrific leeches on society,
daring to click on your product
and add them to their baskets
but not finish the purchase.
But in this video, we're gonna address
the top causes of basket
and checkout abandonment
and how to fix them.
(dramatic tones)
Firstly some terminology stuff
because the phrases cart abandonment
and checkout abandonment are thrown around
kind of interchangeably.
They actually do mean different things.
And by the way, for those
who aren't in the UK,
basket or basket if you're
up north means cart.
So cart abandonment
and basket abandonment,
they mean exactly the same thing.
Right, if it's not already
complicated enough,
when you go onto an eCommerce store
and you put a product in
your basket or your cart,
but you then don't checkout
that is called cart abandonment.
You've got your cart,
but you've abandoned it,
you haven't gone to the next stage.
If you open that basket or
cart, then click checkout
and you go into the checkout process
but you don't finish it,
that is checkout abandonment.
Now what we're gonna be looking at today
are ways of mitigating
both of these things.
One of the most useful
places that you can go
to get insights on this
stuff is Google Analytics.
And if you go to conversions, eCommerce,
shopping behaviour, you should see a chart
that looks something like this.
What this shows you is
the different stages
of your eCommerce funnel.
For example, in this case,
we can see that there
have been 66,000 sessions
in this time period,
with 21,000 of those sessions
having product views,
i.e. the person visited a product page,
3 1/2 thousand of those sessions
had an add to basket in,
2,800 of those sessions
had someone begin the checkout process
and 1,133 of them resulted in sales.
And what we can see is
the percentage drop off
at each stage.
Now the question that you
might have right now is
hmm, is my data normal?
My data looks different to this.
And it's a very common question
that store owners have.
What is an acceptable
checkout abandonment rate?
Well, what I wanted to do
is show you three different examples
from three different businesses
to show you how and why this can vary.
So in this first example, we can see
that we have a basket
abandonment rate of 38%
so on average, 38% of the people,
the sessions that have add to baskets
don't result in a checkout.
Now, in this example, we can
see a basket abandonment rate
of 44%, and in this example
a basket abandonment rate of 51%.
Now we might look at this and think
oh no, 51%, that is horrific.
But this particular
business is a B2B company
and their customers put
items in their basket
to use as a quote generator,
they then get in contact with the business
to talk through the quote
and see if they can
negotiate a bulk discount.
So that is absolutely fine.
Another major difference
that you might see
with your cart, is the number of sessions
that result in product views.
For example, in this one,
we've got 19% of sessions
resulting in product views,
whereas in this one, we
can see a whopping 43%
of sessions resulting in product views.
So if you've got the 19%,
you might be thinking,
oh no, my website visitors aren't even
viewing my products.
Well, in this case, that's
because they've got loads
of really good ranking,
quality information
on the types of products that they sell.
They're picking up a lot
of informational searches
that are coming to the website.
So they're not just
getting commercial traffic.
Whereas on this site, the
majority of the phrases
that they're ranking for
are purely commercial, they
don't have as much informational
content on their website.
So that is why a higher
proportion of their sessions
are resulting in product views.
So what I'm saying with this
is there are loads of
variables that will impact
what your cart abandonment,
what your checkout
abandonment rate looks like.
Including the quality and
the intent of your traffic,
the percentage of returning visitors
who know exactly what they're getting,
versus new visitors is,
how much consideration
goes into the purchase of your product.
For example, if you're
selling prom dresses,
you're gonna be getting a lot of people
that are just adding to
baskets to save it for later
as they're browsing around the internet,
whereas if you're selling SD cards,
you're gonna get a lot of people
that know exactly what they need
and they just need to buy it,
so that's gonna result
in different checkout
and cart abandonment rates.
Now, I really wanted
to give you an average
across all of eCommerce, so
I've got some stats for you.
You want some stats?
I've got stats for you.
According to Fresh Relevance,
the average cart abandonment rate is 57.6%
but wait, SaleCycle says it's 84.27%.
Pretty big difference
between 84% and 57%, right?
Yes, exactly.
What looks good for you might be horrific
for another business.
The most useful approach is
to take a look at analytics,
benchmark each of these levels
and then work on improving
the percentage of people
that move from one level to another.
Benchmark against yourself
and continually focus on improvement.
Alrighty, onto the tips.
By some remote chance you
happen to be enjoying this video
then please click the like button
and also subscribe to our channel.
We release a new video every week
and we also do a YouTube live session
where we'll typically be
ripping apart some websites
and showing you how you can improve
your website's performance.
So click the subscribe icon
and the little bell icon
to be notified every time
we post something new.
Oh, and thing number two,
if you want some free help
with your digital marketing,
the team here at Exposure
Ninja offer what's called
a free website and
digital marketing review.
We'll ask you a few
questions in a quick form
about your business,
your digital marketing,
and your goals.
We'll then research what you're doing,
how well your website's performing
and what you could be doing better
and we'll put our recommendations
into a 15 minute video
of the things to focus on
in order to drive more leads and sales
through your website.
This service is completely free,
you get the video sent
to your email for free
by one of our team.
All you need to do to request it
is go to exposureninja.com/review
and fill in the form.
That's exposureninja.com/review
and fill in the short form.
And for the YouTube commenter who said
they loved my accent, do
enjoy the rest of the video.
Now the first question to ask,
if we're gonna solve cart
and checkout abandonment
the first question we need to ask
Well luckily, the Baymard Institute
has collected some data for us.
They conducted a study of US adults
where they asked, "If
you've abandoned a cart
in the last three months,
what were the reasons that
you abandoned it for?"
And what they got was not
massively surprising to be honest.
By far, the biggest reason
that people abandon carts
is that they were just browsing.
They had no intent of purchasing,
they were just throwing
items into their cart.
No surprises here.
Not whilst we're not gonna be
able to avoid this completely,
what we can do is nudge
some of these people
into impulse purchases,
we'll come back to that later on.
Of all the people that had intent,
i.e. they weren't just browsing,
the most common reason
that people abandon carts
was that extra costs were too high.
For example, things like
shipping, taxes, and fees.
Well let's solve that in a minute as well.
The next most common reason
was that the website wanted them
to create an account.
Nothing more annoying
than trying to purchase
and all of a sudden, you're thrown up
with some register thing, you're like,
I don't want to register,
I just want to checkout.
Now what's really important here
is we actually do want people
to register for an account.
We want people to be
members of our Ecom store
so that we can market to them continually.
This isn't about not
forcing people to sign up
or not encouraging them to sign up.
This is purely about
when you ask for that.
We're gonna look at a really
elegant implementation
of this strategy, just a bit later on.
The next reason, too long or
complicated checkout process.
The next was that people
didn't trust the site
with their card information,
we're gonna look at
how to build credibility.
Then, I couldn't see
or calculate the total
or the cost up front,
the website had errors or crashed, ouch.
Returns policy wasn't satisfactory,
there weren't enough payment methods,
or the credit card was declined.
Now I'm gonna lump in
these last two together
and we're gonna solve that one as well.
So you can see that here,
we've got a bunch of things
regarding website functionality
but also business decisions,
things like delivery times, this is about
the relationship you have
and the package that you have
with your courier.
So that's beyond the scope of this video.
Today we're gonna be looking
at the conversion elements
and what we do on your website
to remove some of these objections.
Okay, so the I'm just browsing people,
how do we get them to purchase?
Well what we can really do is nudge them
from I'm just browsing,
into an impulse purchase,
that's all we can really do.
We have to allow people to just browse
and we're fine with
people adding their stuff
to a cart.
Now we can help them with this
by making their cart auto save
so that when they come back to our site,
they've still got their cart there.
Better still is that you allow people
to save their cart, and
you can get Shopify plugins
that will allow you to do this
where they can enter their email address
to save it for later.
This means that you can run
cart abandonment emails to them,
it also means that if
they check in to your cart
from another browser, you
can allow them to sign in
and see the stuff that they've got there.
But let's return to this idea
of bumping them into an impulse purchase,
'cause everyone loves a good
impulse purchase, right?
Well, here I am on the Boots website.
I'm just gonna add a product to my basket
and then I'm gonna click
view basket and checkout.
Now, I might be here on impulse perhaps.
But what I'm seeing now
is I'm seeing a little
nudge to get me to purchase
because I've got a couple of free gifts
already in my cart, so this is a great way
of nudging people into
an impulse purchase.
There's other stuff going on on this page
which we're gonna come
back to in just a minute.
Anything that you can do to push people
into that impulse purchase
from just looking mode
is a good thing in eCommerce conversion.
Will make your Google Analytics
eCommerce conversion rate very happy.
Okay next, those unexpected costs.
We've all been through it,
you go through the process,
you find the right products that you want,
you stick them in your cart,
you go to checkout, you see
a horrific delivery cost
and you're immediately put off.
Of course, the ultimate answer
is to not have horrific delivery costs.
Although weirdly, there are some occasions
where you might want to
have high delivery costs,
we'll come back to that
in a minute just as well.
But the overall thing is
you don't want to have
big delivery costs.
Now there's of course an argument say,
if you do have high delivery costs
because what you're delivering costs
a lot of money to deliver,
where do you present that?
Do you present that up
front on your website?
For example, in a benefits bar
knowing that some people are
just gonna bounce immediately
as soon as they see that delivery cost.
Or do you wait 'til they've
gone through the process
of adding items to their cart
to show them the delivery
costs at the end.
Well Neil Patel says you want
to bounce them straight away.
I completely disagree with that.
I think you want them to
have gone through the process
of adding stuff into their cart,
they've put in that time and energy
to find the right products,
they have a sunk cost already,
then you hit them with the delivery cost
if they're unattractive.
Now of course, obviously
you don't want them
to bounce at all if they
see your delivery costs,
but if you're gonna have a
certain number of people bounce
it's better to have that
as a high cart abandonment
rather than a high bounce
rate in the first place.
Now one thing you can do
is advertise the trigger points
at which people get free delivery.
You can see here on
this B2B eCommerce site,
free next delivery, orders
100 pounds and over.
Great, so whatever the delivery costs are,
I know that I will get free delivery
over a certain amount.
And it's at this point
where a high delivery cost
potentially becomes an incentive.
Let me explain, let's say
that I've spent 90 pounds
on this site, and I know that
if I spend over 100 pounds,
I get free next day delivery.
Now it's at this point where actually
weirdly, a high delivery cost
can actually incentivize
a higher order value.
Stick with me, let's say
that I'm on this site
and I've spent 70 pounds.
I go to the checkout
and I see that my delivery
costs are 15 pounds.
15 pounds, ouch.
I also see that I get free
delivery over 100 pounds.
Well I can spend another
30 pound on product
to get free delivery.
Basically another 15 pounds
to get 30 pounds worth
of product, my additional
purchase is half price.
Happy days.
I'm now incentivized to
increase my average order value
because that delivery cost was high.
If that delivery cost wasn't as high,
let's say it was only two or three pounds,
I wouldn't have been as incentivized
to get over that free delivery threshold.
So you can see how a high delivery cost
in some circumstances,
can actually increase
your average order value.
(squealing) You thought
digital marketing was simple.
It's not simple, but it's definitely fun.
Now going back to the boots example,
you can see that they
show us how close we are
to that free delivery threshold.
I then have product here
related to what I've got
which I can use to nudge me over
that free delivery threshold.
Smart move.
Now this isn't massively easy to implement
and according to the
platform that you're on
and the extensions you've got,
you may or may not be able to do this.
But it's a good thing to do.
This is ideal because it
removes the thinking part
out of your customer's checkout process,
and anytime we can
remove the thinking part
out of anything, we know
we're gonna get some results.
Now here's a weird
example to watch out for.
Here I am on boohoo.com
and I'm being asked to put
in my shipping information
before I can see any price,
before I even see the delivery cost.
On mobile, that's okay
because when I get down
and see that my delivery cost
is a whopping five pound, 99
on the five pound dress that I've ordered,
on this example, you can't see
but the product I'm
being is this halterneck
puff sleeve, smock dress.
You know, I just thought
I'd mix it up a bit
for the Exposure Ninja videos.
Anyway, it's a five pound product
and they want to charge me
5.99 for next day delivery
which by the way,
isn't the cheapest
delivery option they have.
They just want to charge me
for next day for some reason.
Now this would be a real turn off to me
but I can see that for a whole year,
for an extra two pounds
I can get free next
day delivery unlimited.
Happy days, that sounds good to me.
The problem is, on desktop,
I don't get that same logical process.
I go straight to the shipping page
and I can see immediately
this delivery cost
which looks really high.
I've got no knowledge at this point
that I can reduce that.
I don't know that I can
change for different options
and I don't know that the
premiere option is available.
So I'd imagine that the basket
abandonment rate on desktop
will be significantly higher
because people are being hit
with this high delivery cost immediately
without any context or
information about how to lower it.
Whereas on mobile, we get that information
in a different order, which
makes it more digestible.
The simplest way of course,
to get through all of this
is to just offer free shipping
but obviously it's not
possible for every business.
Alrighty, the next thing
we need to get over
is forcing people to create an account
before they can even check out.
Like we said earlier, we want
people to create an account.
It's great if they create an account
'cause then you've got their information,
you can re-market to them,
you can send abandoned cart,
all that type of stuff.
Happy days, we love people
signing up for account.
But what's not cool is
forcing them to do this
before they go to the checkout.
We just hate this for some
reason as human beings
just like we hate being
burnt, we hate being killed,
we hate being forced to sign up
before we can checkout.
I'm gonna show you some
bad ways of doing this,
to prove that nobody gets it
100% right, 100% of the time,
we're back to our old friends Boots.
Well let's say that
we've seen these things,
we like our free gifts,
we're gonna be a just browsing
that turns into an impulse
purchase, happy days.
We click checkout.
Then what happens?
Well the first thing that happens
is we go to this page.
I want to checkout as guest,
I don't have an account.
Well the checkout as guest thing
isn't massively obvious.
The fact that this is a tab
isn't particularly clear.
It's not highlighted,
it's not a clear button.
But let's say I go to it anyway.
I then have to click
through another message,
they're forcing me to read stuff.
I just want to freaking checkout
and give you my money.
Please stop getting in my way.
But no, I have to click continue.
Then what happens is totally inexcusable.
I'm then forced to go through a reCAPTCHA.
Are you freaking kidding me?
Okay, fine, I'm not a robot.
Then we have to wait for
all of this to happen.
Absolute washout.
You want people to be able to checkout
as quickly as possible.
By the way, if you think that's bad
check this out.
On zulily.com
you can't even see products
without signing up.
Am I qualified to sign up for this?
Do I know anything about this business?
Do I know that it sells
the right products for me?
Do I know that they ship to my location?
Do I know that the terms
are acceptable to me?
Do I know that they sell
at the right price for me?
No, I know nothing.
I'm being forced to sign up
before I can even look at the website.
I just hope they're
not running PPC to this
or any traffic to this.
(shudders) All right, let's
look at a good example
to cleanse ourselves.
This is now Nike, or
Nike if you're American
encourages you to become a member.
And by the way, becoming a member
is just their membership club
so they have your signup details.
So the first stage is we go
through the delivery details,
we've put in our information
about where we're sending
everything through to.
We then have a choice of deliveries.
We can either pay for delivery
or free, we can become a Nike member
and all we need to do is
fill in our information.
Now to me, this is absolute genius
because this is when membership
makes the most sense.
They're not asking me to
become a member earlier
than absolutely makes sense to for me.
I'm essentially being paid four pound, 50
to sign up for membership
and that's what it feels like.
So it's a great implementation
and Nike, fair play for
delaying that request.
Love ya, you just did it.
Okay, let's address the credibility thing.
The thing about people being afraid
to put in their card details
or are somehow unsure about the business.
Now adding credibility
triggers to your checkout pages
and your cart pages
is not only a great way to
give your business credibility,
but it's also a great way
to answer any last minute objections
people might have about things
like delivery reliability
or the quality of your brand.
Now one of my favourite spaces
for analysing this type of thing
is the at home orthodontics
solution industry.
Right, Smile Direct Club and all of those.
Now, this is a fascinating space,
we're gonna do some videos on them.
Loads of the businesses in this space
just copy each other with
all of their websites
basically look exactly the same.
Now the customer journey for those
who aren't familiar,
you get an impression kit which you,
there are little trays that
you stick in your mouth.
You then send that back
and then they start you on your programme
of getting straight teeth.
So this impression kit is
a really important sale
because this is their tripwire.
They're not really generating leads
through an email capture,
they just want you to
buy the impression kit.
So this page becomes really important.
The first thing to notice about this page
is that it's both a product page
and the checkout page.
They don't have a separate page.
This is obviously easier
for a business that sells one product
or one tripwire, so not
everyone can do this.
But we can talk these lessons
and apply them to the
checkout page as well.
So notice how they've got
information about the product,
just like we would expect
on any product page.
We then go into the shipping stuff
and the payment stuff.
The bit that's really interesting for me
is this credibility
that's added just below
the shipping stuff.
So if you're filling it out
and you're like, eh, maybe not sure,
maybe let's have a little look,
more than one million
satisfied grinners and counting
is a great credibility headline,
absolutely love it.
Then we've got people of
different ages, genders,
races, you can see yourself in here.
You can see that this
is a universal product,
people are loving it, it's
user generated photos as well
which gives credibility
which is fantastic.
If we're still not
convinced, underneath that
we have 21,000 five star
reviews on the site.
So what's the impression
that you get from this?
This is pretty safe.
This is a safe bet.
That uncertainty, that
doubt that you might have
is washed away in a tide of testimonials.
Love it.
Now it's not possible for every business
to add credibility stuff
like testimonials and reviews
to their cart pages and
their checkout pages.
For example, if you're on Shopify
unless you're in plus, you're
gonna have difficulty adding
testimonials to your checkout pages.
But you can usually add
them to your cart pages
with an extension.
So do what you can here,
you're not gonna be
able to get it perfect.
And of course, if you're
selling loads of products
you might find it difficult to
have product specific reviews
in the basket, so just opt
for business reviews instead.
Reviews of the company as a whole.
The rule here is that the
more you can do is better,
you don't have to wait to get it perfect
before you implement it.
The final checkout abandonment gremlin
that we're gonna squish
is credit is declined, not
enough payment options.
Credit cards get declined
for all sorts of reasons
and not just because people
don't have any money.
As an HSBC business banking customer
I can tell you HSBC's fraud team
can block a payment that
we've made every week
for the last eight years
to exactly the same vendor
for exactly the same
amount. (snaps fingers)
I think it's just their way
of showing that they care.
But allowing your customers
to pay with an alternate
payment method, for example, PayPal,
Amazon Pay, if their main
credit card gets blocked
is a really good thing to do.
Also worth noting is
the rise of Apple Pay.
So if you've ever watched someone realise
that they don't have their card on them
and they have to go and type the details,
they have to get up and go find their card
and hunt and peck their credit card
into some non-auto fill card form,
you will appreciate the value of having
two taps on the side of your phone
to pay for something.
Apple Pay and Google Pay
have changed the game.
And with platforms like Stripe,
promising merchants up to
2.5X increase in conversions,
by using Apple Pay and Google Pay,
it makes it an absolute no brainer.
One final thing to touch on here
is the rise of the split payment options.
Klarna, Clearpay, Laybuy,
all these types of things.
Really contentious and huge debt bubble
that's likely to burst
all over everyone's faces
at some point, but until that happens,
you can use them to increase
your eCommerce conversion rate.
For example, Klarna claims
that instalment financing in checkout
increases conversion rate by 30%
and average order value by 58%.
Now you might think, well
the products we offer
are not really worth
splitting payments for.
Well, going back to boohoo.com here
you can see how I can pay
for my five pound dress
in six weekly instalments.
So affordability is a relative term
and these services
increase conversion rate
because they allow
people to split payments
in even minuscule purchases.
So I hope you found this video useful.
We've looked at the top causes of cart
and checkout abandonment,
and some of the ways that you can remove
or reduce them.
We first looked at how
we can motivate people
who are just looking
and try and knock them into
those impulse purchases.
We then looked at how we could remove
some of the impacts of high shipping costs
by offering memberships or trigger points
where people could
increase their basket value
in order to get free shipping.
Then we took an intensely critical look
at the frankly unacceptable practise
of requiring people to
sign up for an account
before they go to checkout
and what to do instead
so they still sign up
for an account during checkout.
We then looked at how to
boost your credibility
through the use of
testimonials and reviews,
both through the basket/cart
page and the checkout.
And finally, we talked
about payment options
and how to increase the
number of payment options
you offer to your customers
so they have many different
ways of giving you money.
If you've enjoyed this video,
don't forget to like, subscribe,
give us a comment,
some sort of comment,
whatever you want to say.
And don't forget to request
your free marketing review as well.
Until next time, see you soon.
(theatrical tones)